Welcome to Hypervelocity Engineering

The fire hose of vibe-coded  AI slop will not stop. But

our friends at Microsoft have the  answer: Hypervelocity Engineering.

So I've been going through Microsoft's  open-source stuff on this topic,

Hypervelocity Engineering, their  documentation, and some internal

stuff that I can't share. And even if you're  not a Microsoft shop, this is probably going

to impact you because this is basically the  Silicon Valley bros leaking into enterprise.

All right. So as a quick intro, Microsoft uses  this Hypervelocity Engineering methodology

internally, and they've been doing it across  their Industry Solutions Engineering team,

which is basically Microsoft Consulting. Okay.  So this is what they are trying to do on all of

their projects: use AI to hypervelocity-accelerate  the software engineering life cycle. Everybody in

the Microsoft ecosystem is going to be impacted by  this, from mom and pop .NET shops to big corporate

guys. This is going to leak everywhere. Okay? So,  we should pay some attention to this. Seriously.

So, what are people doing today with their AI  tools? Yeah. If you're at a quite low maturity

level, you will just be opening Copilot Chat.  You'll type a prompt, paste the result back in,
Prompt Engineering vs Context Engineering

accept it, move on with our lives. But this  isn't engineering. This is vibe coding. All

right? And it's going to get everybody in a  lot of trouble. Okay? There's no structure.

There's no verification. There's no  persistence between sessions. I mean,

normally the system would have forgotten  what you did the day before. It can

be really useful. You can do some great  one-shot cracking demos. And when it works,

it's great. When it doesn't work, it sucks,  but you will normally end up with a giant

pull request that nobody understands or  a load of slop with security holes in it.

In Microsoft Docs, they put this pretty  bluntly, okay? They say AI code is still

your code, and if you can't explain it,  understand it, maintain it, or support it,

don't ship it. Which sounds fair enough to me.  But sadly for this boomer, this .NET boomer,

okay, who used to hand-crank his C# code—he  loved it, right—the question isn't "should we

use AI to write code anymore?" All right,  that ship has well and truly sailed away.

It's left the platform. Okay, we have to catch  up because the industry will demand it of us,

or we won't be competitive. We won't be  able to build anything ever. It'll just

be us doing some weird artisan thing that  nobody will pay for, and we will all starve.

All right, so the question is how can we  actually use this AI stuff without burying

ourselves in technical debt? And that  is the industry's number one challenge
What exactly is Hypervelocity Engineering

at the moment. Hypervelocity Engineering is  Microsoft's proposed answer to this problem,

right? And they describe it as expert  multidisciplinary teams using AI tools,

proven starting points, and design thinking  across the entire life cycle. Design thinking is

basically consulting, genuine actual consulting,  the stuff that users on various parts of the

spectrum don't particularly want to do, but  we won't have a choice anymore. They claim,

and this sounds like, you know, your X/Twitter  tech bro yap, two to three times faster delivery,

half the team sizes from what they used  to use. They have three or four people

on a team instead of 10. I don't know what you  were doing with 10 people on the team anyway,

but I guess that was your average Agile Scrum dev  team, right? And 30% of the code in Microsoft is

now written by AI, they claim. So they use this  internally and externally with their customers.

Hypervelocity Engineering, according to the  documentation, has four key parts. All right,

multidisciplinary teams. These are those  full-stack engineers I keep banging on

about. We don't just have a little bit of  front end, a little bit of back end, a DBA,

an architect, a QA. Everybody ends up doing  everything. You are a software engineer. Okay,

design thinking, which is basically consulting all  over again. Proven starting points. So you have

to use accelerators. You don't rewrite or recreate  Hypervelocity Engineering on every single project,

and you use agents across the entire life cycle.  AI does everything from requirements checking to

validation at the end. That's what they want you  to do, and that is the future of this industry,

despite what us poor, whingeing  boomers have to say about it.

If you are a software engineer like me, okay,  you've been doing Agile Scrum for ages. So,

you're saying Agile is already fast. Well, yes,  it is. Agile is agile. Agile Scrum. We've been

doing this for decades now. Do you remember Scrum  Masters? Yeah. At least we're not going to have

Scrum Masters in all of this. All right. I see  that the principles of agile in Hypervelocity

Engineering are still there. All right. We ship  working software, we iterate, we keep talking

to the customer. Sometimes we've forgotten  how to do that in normal agile. But anyway,

we respond to change. Okay, that's what we  do. Most of the ceremony of agile, right,

accumulated to compensate for slow humans. All  right, you know those annoying standups and

those annoying retrospectives and all this slop  you have to deal with every week. Your week is

full of calendar meetings. It's because humans  have been really crap at this process. Right?
Old Agile vs Super Agile

If you think of Hypervelocity Engineering as  super agile or agile squared, you're getting

the hang of it. Things that used to take two  weeks now need to be compressed again down

to two or three days with the same quality  rigor. That is the dream. Do you remember

those Agile Scrum loops on graphic PowerPoints  that all the consultants used to whip out? Do

you remember the SAFe Agile Release Train?  Choo choo. Let's all get on the train. Well,

Hypervelocity Engineering is being described as  multiple parallel development cycles in some sort

of messed up whirlwind vortex of productivity.  You should see some of the graphics that are

coming out on this. Story points and planning  poker, thank God, consigned to the dustbin of

history as it should have been, because the plan  itself is the contract with the AI agent. You

create the plan first. All right. No more backlog  refinement. Okay. The research agent reads your

codebase and writes the backlog for you. Or,  as one of the examples that Microsoft uses,

they just take a meeting transcript to use  the Azure DevOps MCP server to automatically

create the work items that the customer wants  based on those transcripts. Okay, it's wild.

So, it's still iterative and incremental. But I  think if you try to squint a bit, okay, you can

see that this is moving software engineering  again from what was a creative team sport,

almost like making a movie, into more of an  engineering discipline, like actual engineering

jobs. Okay. I mean, I think calling it agile  squared is a nice analogy, because in old agile,

one dev was one dev, right? But in Hypervelocity  Engineering, one dev is orchestrating a little

mini team of agents. And you might have seen  one of my old videos on the squad thing that

they were coming up with. But that is sadly  the direction that Microsoft and Enterprise

Software want you to go over the next few years.  And we're not going to have a choice. Okay.

So, how do you level up? How do you level up  to Hypervelocity Engineering? Well, step one,

okay, is moving from prompt engineering, which is  just spamming what you want built into Copilot or

Claude or whatever, and moving into context  engineering. And context engineering is a bit

like this, okay? The entire information pipeline  of your product and your work items and how to

verify the work is all available to the agent,  to the AI LLM that you're using. You tell it

what documentation it has access to, what coding  conventions you want to use, and it also has all

the context from all the work you did yesterday,  which if you just started a brand new chat session

in Copilot, you wouldn't have, right? Context  is so important because it actually lets you use

cheaper models, right? You don't have to bankrupt  yourself or your employer if there's actual work

on the context before using it in the model.  A small model with good context can outperform

something twice its size is what Microsoft claims,  and they have the data. So I kind of believe them.

Practically what this means you need to do  is, if you've never written or got the agent

to write a Copilot instructions file and stick  it in your repository, you haven't told your AI

what patterns and libraries it should be using  when writing code on this particular project,

and 80% of the value is left on the table.  Okay? It doesn't matter what model you use,

you need to level up from just spamming prompts  in and designing the context for your AI to use.

All right, I know this is painful for a boomer  like me, but this is just the way it's going.

So, how does Microsoft do it? This is it. The  money shot, boys. Okay, the actual workflow that
RPI: Research, Plan, Implement, Review

Microsoft uses for their customer work and their  internal work, they call it RPI: Research, Plan,

Implement, and then Review. All right. Discover  is a fifth phase, but we'll ignore that. RPI is

a name that they stick with. Each is handled  by a different agent. They've created agents

for their AI LLM to use. And then by using  this process, the agents can hand off work.

First, there's a research agent. It goes off and  reads your codebase, your APIs, your conventions,

documentation, but it's not allowed to write  code. Okay? It can't write code. It just has

to plan and research, which is fine. Okay? I  mean, that's actually, if we were engineers,

the first thing we do shouldn't be to write code,  okay? It actually researches the task and creates

some evidence, right? It gets file references  and then comes up with a recommended approach,

because then it plans. It sends it over to  the planning agent for phase two. All right?

This takes the research and produces an explicit  plan with even some line numbers in some cases,

I'm told. Right, something then validates the  plan to make sure that it's okay against the

research and the context that you've given  your AI LLM, and it tries to catch design

issues before the code is written. So phase three  is implement. Now we can write some code. Okay,

you might still have some bit of fun with  this, maybe you can actually do some coding

for a change, but in reality, there's probably  a coding agent and you will need to handhold

and review the work because  phase four is review. All right?

And you're supposed to create automatic  checks and hooks and make sure that the

linting passes. And who uses StyleCop?  This is the equivalent, okay, of when

you had these weird people that insisted  on using StyleCop on every single project,

but basically, you have to check  the work. So you've got agents,

AI checking AI to keep it all on track. And  this is kind of checks and balances for the real

engineering work. It can be tough to swallow for  us creatives, but that's what they want us to do.

Here's a quote from the big boys, Microsoft  themselves. Okay. "When AI knows it cannot

implement during research, it stops optimizing  for plausible code and starts optimizing for

verified truth." Okay. The constraint changes the  optimization target. All right? Constraints make

AI better, not worse. So the more context you  have, the better the result you're going to get

when you finally get round to asking it to build  your app for you. They even have this thing called
Tools Microsoft offer for Hypervelocity Engineering

phase bleed. Would you believe it? That sounds  pretty bleak to me. They leak phases together,

and this really does a bad job on their  AI-assisted efforts, is what Microsoft says.

The good news is this isn't  just an idea. All right,

Microsoft has published the same tools that they  use with their consulting customers. All right,

you don't have to build all this yourself.  They've open-sourced the whole toolkit.

It's called hve-core, right? It's  a VS Code extension. It's a GitHub

Copilot CLI plugin. And the source code is at  github.com/microsoft/hve-core. This is how you

install it in VS Code: install the extension  ise-hve-essentials.hve-core is what you want.

This gives you an entire dump of Microsoft's  entire AI development stack. All right,

you got agents for research, planning,  implementation, review, PR review,

doc ops, whatever the hell that is, conventional  commit messages, prompt evaluation, a coaching

agent that actually teaches you how to do design  thinking and be a proper user-centric consultant,

as well as memory agents. The whole works. All  right. They've even got some coding standards

for your favorite programming languages, such as  C#, my favorite obviously, and obviously Python,

Bash, TypeScript. It's all there. Okay. They've  really, really published the kitchen sink.

So, time for some advice. So, I'll close this rant  off with some advice for those boomers out there
How to get started with HVE

like me that want to get started because they  want to pay the bills, and if they don't do this,

they will probably eventually at some point  get out-competed in the market. All right? So,

you need to stop one-shotting stuff. Okay? You  need to create a plan. Next time you have a task

that you want to use AI with, force yourself  to create two prompts. Okay? "Research this.

Do not write code." And then "propose a  plan." All right, you don't have to use

the actual hve-core stuff for this. You can  just practice when you're doing your yapping,

but plan first. All right, the next step is  to try the hve-core stuff. Okay, you can just

copy and paste some of the useful agent code,  the agents, into your skillset library in your

repository and share it amongst your team. So  this is like Copilot instructions, for example.

Step three is to write that file. All right, pick  something you care about like testing or secrets

management or UX design or whatever, or your  favorite libraries. Like my instructions file

would say "don't use AutoFixture," for example,  or AutoMapper. Okay, right, particularly don't use

AutoMapper, and put it in copilot-instructions.md.  Okay. And the AI LLM will never use it. And if it

does accidentally use it randomly, another agent  will check it against the instructions and make

sure that you didn't accidentally put AutoMapper  in your source code, for example. All right.

So, in closing, is this going  to change your life? Well,

I don't think it's going to change our lives,  our side projects. All right. Because actually,

prompt engineering is fun. It's like pulling a  slot machine. Will I get it right this time? Okay.

But when you're working with a team and  are using these very expensive tools,

all right, you kind of owe it to the poor gits  paying your token bills to do this properly,

right, and make sure that you're not wasting  everybody's time and money and GPU usage. Okay,

so Microsoft has done this for you. I mean, they  get the luxury obviously of unlimited GitHub

Copilot tokens, I'm assuming. So some of their  advice and shilling on X is a bit difficult for

us plebs to also replicate. But anyway, we still  should try and do some actual engineering here.

If you think of it as super agile or super  mega ultra agile, which I think we should

coin in this video, or agile squared  is a bit of a lazy way of doing it,

we need to be up to date on this because at some  point you'll be asked to do a project this way.

And if you haven't practiced with it, you'll be  stuck. You won't even be able to wipe your own

butt. Okay? And you'll look very stupid, right?  So this is at least... I actually think this is

better than Agile Scrum. Okay? It's better  than story points, planning poker, therapy,

retrospective sessions. All of that is meatware  for humans, and this is way smarter and more

concise. And if we can get used to it, okay, and  actually focus our human skills on the consulting

aspect of our projects, well, maybe we'll be  happier. Maybe software engineers will be happier.

Let me know what you think. Is Hypervelocity  Engineering going to be a total slop disaster

for the industry? Or will it be a saving grace  and turn us into proper real professionals?

Let me know in the comments. I reply  to every single one. Why not subscribe,

because I'm going to do a video where I  update one of my apps using this methodology,

and it's probably going to  be next. Thanks for watching.
